In this video, we're going
to look at how we can
summarize large amounts of
data using a PivotTable.
Rowan has been presented
with this set of
renewable energy data
and asked to create
a series of visualizations to
tell a story about
renewable energy.
It's quite a lot of data.
If I scroll down to the bottom,
you see we've got
over 20,000 records,
so he can't just create a
chart directly on this data.
He has to somehow summarize it.
He could do this with
a sum-ifs calculation,
but it's going to require
a little bit of setup,
some tricky
calculations, and it's
not going to be very
easy to change.
We're going to look at
a really powerful and easy way of
doing this using a PivotTable.
Before we can create
a PivotTable,
it is quite important that
you have nice clean data
organized into columns with
no blank rows and
no blank columns.
You can have blank cells,
but it's really important that
columns containing numeric data,
only contain numeric data.
A strong recommendation as well,
is that you convert
your data to a table.
This has two
advantages: it will be
easier to refer to the data
when creating the pivot,
but more importantly,
it will make
updating the pivots
far more efficient.
So click somewhere in your data.
We're going to come
to the Insert tab,
click on the Table icon and
press Enter or click okay.
We're going to give our
table name as well.
So on the table design
ribbon, on the left,
we're going to call it
tblRE, and press "Enter."
It's a good idea to go for
something quite easy to type.
Our data is now all setup,
and we're going to come
to our Insert tab again.
On the far left,
you'll see the Insert PivotTable,
which is what we're
going to do next.
Before you create a
PivotTable, however,
you need to have a question in
mind that you want
to have answered.
What Rowan would like to know is;
what is the breakdown of
electricity capacity
from renewable,
RE, versus non-renewable,
NONRE, technologies?
We're going to
answer that question
with just four clicks.
I'm going to click
on the PivotTable,
and it's picked up my
data-set automatically,
which is great and I would
like to put this into
a new worksheet,
so I'm just going
to click "Okay."
What happened here is Excel has
given us a place
holder, which says,
"I know you want a PivotTable,
but what do you want this
PivotTable to look like?"
We design the PivotTable
using the Field List on
the right-hand side.
Each of the columns from
our original data-set
is represented,
and we just choose what data
we want to see in our pivot.
I would like to see my
total electricity capacity,
so I'm going to take that
and you'll see it's actually
summed up the electricity
capacity from our raw data.
But I actually want
that broken down
by renewable versus
non-renewable.
Four clicks, too easy.
Let's take a moment to see what's
happening on the right-hand side.
When I choose a value that
contains numeric data,
it automatically puts it in
the values quadrant
and sums it up.
When I choose a column that
contains non-numeric data,
it automatically puts it in
the rows quadrant and takes
each unique value from
that column and makes
it a raw label.
As well as the Field List,
you will notice we get
two new ribbons: PivotTable
Analyze and Design.
On the PivotTable Analyze ribbon,
we have the option to
give our pivot a name,
which is actually a good idea,
so I'm going to click into
the box and I'm
going to type pvt,
and this is just going to
be our renewable energy,
so RE, and then you
can press "Enter."
We should probably rename
the sheet as well,
so I'm going to double-click
where it says Sheet 1,
and this is going to
be RE versus NONRE.
You've also got to be for
color-coding system going on,
so I'm going to
right-click on that,
come to my tab Color
and make that blue,
so I can distinguish
between pivots and data.
Now let's create
another PivotTable.
This time Rowan wants to
see similar information,
but broken down by region.
So back in our renewable
energy worksheet,
I'm going to click into
the data and come
to our insert tab.
If you have one of the
newer versions of Excel,
you may notice you've also got
a recommended PivotTables Option.
This can be a really quick way of
getting the pivot
information that you want,
and you see there's
exactly the PivotTable
I was hoping to create.
So I could just click on it.
For practice though, and for
those people who don't have the
recommended pivots I'm not
going to do it that way today.
I'm going to click cancel,
and I'm going to come back
to the PivotTable button.
Again, we're going to
do it from scratch.
So same data range.
But this time I want to put
my pivot into an
existing worksheet.
I could put it in this one,
but they take a bit of space.
So I'm still going to put
it in its own worksheet,
but I'm going to put it
into capacity by region.
We're going to click
on that sheet,
we're going to add
some filters later.
So we're going to leave
some space and I'm
going to choose
cell A3 and I'm
going to say okay.
Very similar to last time,
we're going to
choose our capacity
and we're going to
choose our region,
and there's a
breakdown by region.
But I would also
like to see a split
between the RE and the non-RE.
When I select it however,
it does exactly
what I said before.
It automatically adds
it to the rows column,
and you'll see it's added
it underneath the region.
We can reposition it however.
So I click and drag that
to above the region,
which looks pretty good,
or alternatively, I can put
it into the columns quadrant.
So I'm going to grab the RE and
non-RE and drag it
into the columns.
Now you see why it's
called a PivotTable,
because you can easily
pivot this information,
turn the data around to
see it in whichever
form you needed to.
Let's give this one
a name as well.
So coming into the name section,
I'm just going to
call this pvtRegion,
and we're just going to create
one last example today.
This time, however,
we're going to start by
clicking into this sheet
where we wanted to go,
and again, I'm
going to choose A3.
I'm going to come to insert,
and I'm going to
choose PivotTable.
This time it knows
where to put it,
but it doesn't know
where to get the data.
Fortunately, it
comes from a table.
So we can just type
tblRE and press Enter.
So there's another way
of creating the pivot,
you can actually start in
the location and then
specify the data.
For our last pivot,
we would like to see a
breakdown of capacity,
but this time by
technology and year.
So we are going to take capacity
and then I'm going to
take main technology.
But it's hard to see what's
renewable and what's
non-renewable,
so I'm going to grab
my RE or non-RE,
but this time rather
than ticking,
I'm going to click and
drag it straight to
where I wanted to go,
and finally, I need
to see my year.
But we have to be a
little careful with
this one if I just tick it,
because the year is
actually a number,
you can see it's added
to my values quadrant,
which is not what I want.
So I'm just going to grab it from
values and put it into columns.
I could of course have
done that directly.
Now a few things
before we wrap up.
If I want to remove a
value from my PivotTable,
I can unselect it or I can
grab it and drop
it off the pivot.
So easy in, easy out.
I do actually want that,
so I put it back in.
If I click away from the pivot,
both the ribbons and
the field list vanish,
and when I click back,
of course they reappear.
But because this takes up space,
you may at some point decide to
hit the cross and close it,
and now it's gone. That's okay.
To get it back on your
PivotTable, analyze.
On the right-hand side,
you'll see an option to show
the field list and when
you turn that on its back.
So this allows you to turn
on and off your field list.
Finally, let's give
this pivot a name.
So we are going to
come up to the ribbon.
I'm going to call this pvtYear,
and there's our last PivotTable.
In the next video,
we're going to look
at how we can format
our pivots and change
the calculations.